A Hero's Journey
-Joseph Campbell's Hero's Journey pattern


Part I: Departure

Call to action is when character leaves their initial life to go on some kind of adventure

Character may initially reject the call of action but usually come anyway

Crossing the Threshold

The threshold is the boundary between the life the hero has known before and the unknown challanges that await him. Behind him is his home and his past life - before him is uncertainty and danger.

Crossing the threshold, then, is when the hero takes the first steps on his adventure, leaving home and setting off on his journey.

Part II: Initiation

Part II contains most of the rising action and most of the excitement. It includes:

*The Challenges or Trials

*Supernatural Helper or Mentor

*The Special Weapon

*The Abyss or Temptation

*The Transformation

The Challenges or Trials

The challenges make up the bulk of the hero's journey. They are the things the hero must overcome, the monsters the hero must fight and the battles the hero must win, in order to complete his journey.

Supernatural Helper or Mentor

The hero usually has a mentor who looks out for him, teaches him what he needs to know, gives him advice and guidance, and maybe even gives the hero a weapon or magical object.

Unfortunately, the mentor usually also has to be out of the picture in order for the hero to come into his own and truly show his worth. For this reason, mentors have to leave the hero...

Special Weapon

The hero also has a weapon, often one that only he can wield. This may be something given to him by the mentor, or perhaps something he has to earn

This special weapohn can come in many forms...

...a pen from a mentor, a magival swors, father's lightsaver, or ... chosen just for him

The Abyss of Temptation

Here's where things get tricky for our hero

An abyss is defined as "an immeasurably deep chasm, depth, or void."

So, the abyss is the darkest, most perilous part of the hero's journey

They may even face the temptation to become evil or desert their quest

The Transformation

This is the point where the hero achieves his goal, wins the battle, finishes the quest, saves the girl, kills the bad guy...

...and, most importantly, is changed by his experiences. He becomes a true hero.



Part III: The Return

Finally, the character is ready to return home and claim his place as a true hero. His journey is coming to a close. The final part of the journey consists of:

*The Return Home

*The Mastery of Two Worlds

The return Home.

This step is pretty much just what it sounds like. In order to prove himself a changes person and a true hero, the hero must return home. He may decide not stay there, but he will usually return at least temporarily.

The Mastery of Two Worlds

This final step refers to the hero's ability to reconile his experiences on his journey with his life back home.

He has seen and learned things that have changed him.

How can he live in the world he is used to, but still stay true to his new role as a hero?


Not all heroes can do this. For instance, Frodo, in Lord of the Rings, cannot go back to his old world and instead chooses to go join the elves.


Now, it's your turn to examine how Campbell's pattern is used in one of your favorite films. Yes, it's team speech assignment time! C
